\documentclass{acm_proc_article-sp}

\title{Coupling the distributed Large Eddy Simulation and Weather Research and
Forecasting model using OASIS3-MCT and MPI}

\numberofauthors{1}

\author{
    \alignauthor
    Gordon Reid\\
    \affaddr{School of Computing Science}\\
    \affaddr{University of Glasgow}\\
    \email{1002536r@student.gla.ac.uk}
}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}

Scientists studying the geosciences have created software which models different
aspects of our planet's ecosystem, for example ocean, wind, land and atmosphere.
On their own, each model is useful however for higher accuracy, and to model
more complex aspects of our climate, these models need to be coupled together.
The project proposed involves creating a distributed version of the Large Eddy
Simulator (LES) then coupling the LES with the Weather Research and Forecasting
model (WRF). The coupled system should scale to large computing clusters.
Ideally the coupling would also be generic such that the OpenCL-accelerated LES
could be used to allow greater performance on heterogeneous systems.

\end{abstract}

\section*{Introduction}

Our planet's ecosystem is highly complex. Geoscientists that are interested in
modelling this ecosystem have created numerous systems which each model one
aspect, for instance a Large Eddy Simulator (LES) to study turbulent air flows
\cite{Nakayama2011,Nakayama2012} and the Weather Research and Forecasting Model
(WRF) for mesoscale weather prediction. For the last decade or so, interest has
evolved from individual models to combining models \cite{Michalakes2010}. With
this trend, a number of model coupling frameworks have been created to support
the desire for co-simulation. These allow a single application to make use of
multiple models without significant changes to the individual models code bases.
Models communicate with each other via data exchanges at each timestep.

The proposed work for the project involves two distinct stages. The first
requires the modification of existing LES code to create a distributed version
using the Message Passing Interface (MPI) for use on computer clusters. An
additional aim is to allow use of the OpenCL-accelerated LES
\cite{Vanderbauwhede2014} in the distributed system to improve the model's
throughput further. The second stage involves the coupling of the distributed
LES with the WRF using a model coupling framework. There is a potential third
stage which involves comparing the coupling to the coupling using the Glasgow
Model Coupling Framework (gcmf) \cite{Vanderbauwhede2014}.

A number of modeling frameworks have been looked at, including: the Model
Coupling Toolkit (MCT) \cite{Larson2005}; OASIS3-MCT \cite{Valcke,Valcke2013};
the Earth System Modeling Framework (ESMF) \cite{Ramework2004}; and OpenPALM
\cite{Piacentini2011}. After comparing these modeling frameworks, OASIS3-MCT was
chosen given its continued development and simple coupling mechanism.

The remainder of the document discusses the research problem in detail before
going onto an in-depth literature review for the state of the art in distributed
and coupled applications. The proposed approach and work plan for the project is
then given to conclude the proposal.

\section*{Statement of Problem}

Individuals models for ocean, land, atmosphere, etc are useful in ther own right
however geoscientists are now wanting to model more complex scenarios that
require collaboration of multiple models. The collaboration can also lead to
more accurate results since additional effects of other parts of the system can
be added to the model in question e.g. merging WRF and LES led to greater wind
velocity being predicted compared with running WRF on its own
\cite{Kinbara2010,Nakayama1998}.

Currently, WRF and LES are independent models and LES has two variants: the
original single threaded code and the OpenCL-accelerated variant. Vanderbauwhede
and Takemi \cite{Vanderbauwhede2013} have also investigated the benefits of GPU
accelerating WRF and found this to be ``feasible and worthwhile''.

The problem to be addressed is two-fold: creating a MPI variant of LES to allow
LES to run on multiple nodes in a computer cluster and then coupling this
variant of LES with WRF. The MPI variant of the LES will increase the
performance of the simulator since it will allow it to make use of a multi-node
system such as a Beowulf cluster. The coupling of MPI LES with WRF will allow
create a system that benefits from scalable performance and high accuracy
results.

\section*{Literature Review}

Intro and statement of problem in much more detail. Discussion of effective MPI
usage as well.

Present an overview of relevant previous work including articles, books, and
existing software products. Critically evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of
previous work.

\subsection*{Message Passing Interface}

What is it?

Why is it useful?

How to make sure MPI is used efficiently?

\subsection*{Model Couplers}

\subsubsection*{Why Couple?}

Applications currently exist that model a single aspect of our Earth's climate.
Each model is useful in their own right however more accurate and detailed
analysis can be conducted by making use of multiple models. For instance, the
effect ocean and land temperatures have on airflows could be investigated. This
isn't viable by using the models independently.

\subsubsection*{How to Couple?}

Three ways to couple models: merging code bases (bad); using some method of
communication (e.g.) MPI, or using a coupling framework (best).

\subsubsection*{Comparison of Model Couplers}

MCT

ESMF

OASIS3-MCT

OpenPALM

\section*{Proposed Approach}

State how you propose to solve the software development problem. Show that your
approach is feasible, but identify any risks.

\section*{Work Plan}

Show how you plan to organise your work, identifying intermediate deliverables
and dates.

\begin{itemize}
	\item Create distributed LES
	\item Couple LES and WRF
	\item Evaluate performance
	\item Compare coupling framework to GCMF
	\item Evaluate differences
\end{itemize}

\bibliographystyle{acm}
\bibliography{1002536r}

\end{document}
